foreign
[Music]
welcome to what is going on for New
thought from the edge of om each week on
omtimes flagship radio show veteran
broadcaster author and media consultant
Sandy sedgebeer conducts
thought-provoking interviews with
inspirational authors artists musicians
scientists speakers and filmmakers who
are working at the point where
spirituality and science meet
Consciousness at the very edge of um
here is your host Sandy sedgebeer
hello throughout the years that I've
been conducting interviews on science
Consciousness and spirituality I've read
numerous mind shifting books and heard
goodness knows how many extraordinary
stories
but The Story You're going to hear today
is so far beyond remarkable that I've
struggled to find words to adequately
describe it all I can say by way of
introduction is that what you're about
to hear is a story that I didn't know
until I read it that I and no doubt
countless millions of seekers have been
waiting for our entire lives
Christopher M Bay she's professor
emeritus in the department of philosophy
and religious studies at Youngstown
State University where he talked for 33
years
a fellow at The Institute of noetic
Sciences he's also adjunct faculty at
the California Institute of integral
studies and on The Advisory board for
Gruff transpersonal training and the
Groff Foundation
an award-winning teacher and
international speaker Chris Bates joins
me now to discuss his book LSD and the
mind of the universe diamonds from
Heaven which has been held as a grouping
account of an utterly unique and
extraordinary hero's journey that opens
our minds and hearts to a new vision of
our universe and ourselves as
Inseparable from the ineffable being
that we have called God Chris bash
welcome
ascending it's a pleasure to be here
with you today this is a long-awaited
interview I have to say Chris so little
background in 1979 you took the first
step on a life-changing journey to
explore your mind in the mind of the
universe as deeply and systematically as
possible with the help of LSD
if you had known then that it would take
20 years of excruciating pain suffering
Bliss and intense purification plus many
more years of digesting process in
organizing and writing to publish this
book would you still have put yourself
through it
that's a good question I'm not sure that
I would I think knowing now what I if I
had known then what I'd known now I
would have been gentler on myself I
would have used in a gentler product
called balancing High versus low doses
balancing lse with psilocybin and
ayahuasca
um I still would have taken the journey
but it might not have been as taken as
aggressively as I did
yeah yeah well knowing the outcome you
can't really say no I wouldn't have done
it
so you've experienced 73 high-dose LSB
sessions following protocols established
by stanislavgolf with the intention of
engaging hyper intensive States
in a way that would allow the initial
chaos at each new level to clear and
also allow your own biophysical and
psychological systems to adapt how did
you know
the precise dosage to accomplish that in
the way that you wanted to
well Stan was very clear in his early
books and in LSD Psychotherapy it was
published in 1980 uh the protocol
differences between psycholytic and
low-dose therapy versus psychedelic
high-dose therapy cyclic running doses
anywhere from 50 150 micrograms
and high-dose psychedelic therapy
between four to 500 350 to 500
and at that time high-dose psychedelic
therapy was being worked used at Spring
Grove Hospital in Baltimore and they
were trying to basically trigger
something approximating a near-death
experience for people who were dying
they were terminal patients and trying
to give them a glimpse of where they
were going and I thought well if you
could do this work three times safely
then you could do it more than three
times safely and I chose to work with
high doses of LSD
for a couple of reasons one night I had
an a false model of of what the project
was the model I had was a model of
personal transformation I thought this
was about my personal healing my
personal Spiritual Awakening uh that
turned out to be an incomplete
profoundly incomplete model and I was
thinking that you know Spiritual
Awakening is about Clearing Your Karma
our Karma ultimately is finite and by
working with high doses I would
basically being uh it was I knew it
would be more difficult work but I
thought of myself as basically biting
off my karma and larger bites and
clearing it faster turns out that that's
a false model personal transformation
was too small to describe it and the
doses I took from the literature I
basically wanted to push my system as
hard as I could to be efficient I mean I
was in the Dual career marriage getting
time for these sessions was very
complicated it had to balance a lot of
schedules and I wanted to get as much
done in every session as I could
uh again what I learned on along the way
is because Consciousness is Unified at
its source that when you hyperstimulate
Consciousness you're not just hyper
stimulating your personal field of
Consciousness you're hyper stimulating
some portion of the unified field of
Consciousness and therefore the dynamic
that get activated the Dynamics of
healing and purification and
illumination uh are much much larger
than uh personal Dynamics
but what point did you realize this
this would be a personal Journey at all
that there was so much more going on
well for about the first two and a half
years it looked it followed very much
the the material that Stan Groff had
been tracking my first two and a half
years of work were very much perinatal
in nature going through the death
rebirth process
experiencing re-experiencing one's birth
experiencing a profound confrontation
with death and the meaninglessness of
existence but then I this culminated in
a crushing ego death experience and a
liberating ego death experience
and then according to Stan's early
descriptions what I was expecting after
going through ego death access to
transpersonal reality would get easier
but what happened in my sessions is that
I began to go through
that periods of vast suffering that got
deeper and deeper and larger uh terrible
suffering and pain not personal
Collective opening up to the suffering
of thousands and hundreds of thousands
of people and thousands of years of time
and at first I thought this represented
a deepening of ego death
but it went on for so long and it
involved so many people that eventually
I had no alternative to but to come to
the conclusion that what was being
healed or transformed in this process
was not my personal psyche but some
aspect of the collective psyche of
humanity that just as personal trauma
gets internalized in our personal psyche
and can produce pathology likewise the
vast quantities of of trauma that
Humanity has absorbed through history
gets collected and internalized in the
collective psyche and produces a kind of
social pathology at the collective level
and something was using my sessions to
basically address and heal to some
degree
um this Collective trauma
so they didn't say
didn't see anything random about this
journey because sometimes you didn't
have a session for long periods even
years but when you went back you always
seem to
you know catch up where you were at the
time before yeah
that was my sense of it too that
um
I was engaging a long and sustained
conversation communion initiation with a
larger Consciousness and the size and
scale of this Consciousness kept
deepening and changing as my work
continued
um
and it I always felt myself engaging in
intelligence
when this is most dramatic perhaps this
continuity across time I did four years
of work I stopped for six years and then
I started again for another 10 years of
work
when I stopped I was working on the
ocean of suffering material in the
purification phase of a session I was
engaged in this ocean of suffering I
stopped for six years
six years later in a completely
different time of my life with different
expectations
when I went into the work again the
ocean of suffering started exactly where
it had stopped and continued indicating
clearly that the the intelligence that I
was engaging was guiding what was
happening it was in charge of my
sessions and all I did was really open
up
isolate myself from the world open up
and follow wherever it wanted to take me
and I found that if I trusted myself
completely and surrendered to where it
would take me I would go through these
intense purification processes or death
processes eventually it would culminate
in some type of Crisis or breakthrough
and then I would be spun into ecstatic
revelatory experiences for the remainder
of the session and the next session
would begin the cycle again so I just I
learned to trust that process
but but the suffering you know there
were I was listening to it on Audible as
well as reading the book and there were
times when I was you know speaking to
you and saying my goodness why are you
going back you know it's so painful
yeah
you go back not because the you know I
don't like pain who likes pain for
nothing like that you go back for the
joy that's waiting on the other side of
pain you go back on with the
understanding that this the suffering
this pain is in some way a purification
process which I did not understand the
full scope of it at the time but I
trusted Stan's work and it was affirmed
in my work that this is a purification
process and that when you go through it
then the doors open
and that's why you do it for the
revelations for the insights for the
Visions for the for the opportunity to
enter into such deep and profound
communion with the universe so the
suffering is the Gateway it's a Gateway
it's it's just a pro you know we have to
let go of being small in order to enter
into being large and it's not always
easy to let go of being small but it's
not just let going letting go of your
personal identity you know we'll in
therapy we often focus on ego death and
many of the mystical Traditions focus on
ego death but what I found was that ego
death was just the first of many
patterns of death and rebirth so that
what one is letting go of
at deeper levels of the journey are much
larger much deeper than just egoic
structures and it's such a mystery that
at the end of the book I actually have
an appendix where I ask the question
what dies when you're so far beyond ego
death and yet you are still having
sensations of dying loss of control what
is it that's actually dying in that
process yeah yeah exactly and when we
listen to it you know we can't help
asking the same question so
um
I don't want to focus too much on
individual sessions but there was one
that I really did want to bring up and
it's actually a whole collection of
sessions where you experience life as
many different women in turn what do you
think was the purpose of those
experiences and how did they impact you
well that was my that was my ego death
experience
where the the universe after about this
is the 10th session ninth ten session it
just broke me like a twig it just took
my identity and snapped it now I had
begun the day as a white ivy league
educated philosopher passionately
concerned with the meaning of existence
and the universe forced me to become the
exact opposite of that I became women I
became women of color I became women who
were not interested in the meaning of
life at all who were not educated at all
and it did not allow me to experience I
was myself but I was myself in all these
other roles other modes
and it it terrified me it just scared
the bejeebus out of me and I fought it
but eventually when I gave up and I
surrendered and I allowed myself to
become all these women then
suddenly things shifted and I was taken
under the arm of the great mother and
initiated into the lives of hundreds of
women the more positive side of female
experience given many experiences of
women's lives conceiving giving birth
loving husbands loving children
and I think the the fundamental message
here was not reclaim your former lives
as women I I know I have former lives as
women that has never been a question for
me
I think the issue was where you are
going gender does not exist let go
so I was being taken into a level of
reality where male female is irrelevant
but to do that I had to be broken of my
male identity I had to allow myself to
go into some larger identity and
becoming women was simply just part of
that breaking process
all um 20 years seems to have been quite
a massive breaking process I mean you
were doing this nobody knew about it
except your wife you weren't allowed to
talk about it to anyone or you didn't
allow yourself to you were teaching
mature students philosophy and often you
know there were aspects of things that
you were teaching where your experiences
would have been the perfect example to
offer them but you couldn't do that what
was that like for you
it wasn't so bad in the beginning but it
got increasingly difficult as I went on
especially when I could feel a question
coming from students that had personal
deep significance to them and an answer
would spontaneously rise from my person
which but an answer that was grounded in
my psychedelic experience and I couldn't
some of them I could lay off on the Stan
Groff's experiences or other psychedelic
research experiences but some of them I
couldn't lay off and I could not bring
my own psychedelic experiences forward
and I began to experience a catch in my
throat
my voice would actually kind of I would
lose control for a split second and it
would sound like a little bark coming
out of my voice it was embarrassing I
mean I was I was literally strangling on
what I wanted to say and was not allowed
to say
and that became difficult I because
the cost of doing this work I knew would
be my silence
and I paid that price but I did not
realize in the beginning that when you
commit to dividing your life in this way
to have a a daytime job as a straight
professor and then a nighttime job as a
psychonaut
that it causes fractures in your psyche
which reach deeper than you may have
anticipated in the beginning and in the
end uh these cracks were only able to be
healed when I finally uh came out of the
Psychedelic closet and began to allow
myself to speak openly about these
experiences
um
most people these days especially in the
spiritual Arena are familiar with ndes
reincarnation channeled works that
explain who we are and where we go in
the afterlife and you've taught courses
on these yourselves but your experience
took you Way Beyond where anyone has
gone before it gave you a whole new
vision of the Bardo tell us a bit about
that
well the classic understanding of the
Bardo I think was affirmed in my
sessions that is there are many many
many layers of spiritual reality and
when we die we return to that layer that
reflects our Spiritual Development or
our spiritual maturity and it's a it's a
it's a social domain there there are
other beings there not only other
uh incarnate beings or discarnate beings
but there are also Guardians and and
guides and so forth
and the basic idea is after you die you
go through a debrief process in which
you process your most recently completed
life you learn what you kind of what you
did
poorly and what you did very well
um you go through this process and then
you go through kind of a returning to
the world of spirit to returning home
and eventually you go through when it's
time to Incarnate again to the choice
process of incarnating again and because
because the evolution of the soul is so
vast and covers such a wide spectrum of
development
it takes many many lifetimes to
actualize the full potential of a human
existence and so there are many tiers of
the Bardo domain in my experience
affirms this classic Vision I had many
experiences of kind of tapping into
Bridal reality and it's a collective
reality I think the ocean of suffering
kind of is analogous to the Buddhist
concept of the hell Realm
uh I tapped into levels which would be
analogous to the the high deity realm uh
in the Buddhist cosmology of the six
Locas or the six realms
and there are also there is a reality
that's outside the Bardo when you get
basically in a sense graduate from the
earth system when you move beyond that
spiritual echo of time space experience
and enter into the reality beyond all
Bardo existence and that is
correlated with what I would describe as
the diamond Luminosity the domain of
diamond luminosity
why do you call it that
because that's that's that was the
experience
um one encounters light often in deep
spiritual experiences and near-death
experiences in psychedelic experiences
when you go through a death rebirth
process often you have the sensation of
being flooded with light encountering
light is it's almost a universal in the
spiritual traditions
um and I had experienced light at many
forms and many times in my practice but
when I came to this Advanced stage of my
work which started with the 45th session
I encountered a light that was unlike
anything I had encountered previously it
was
in incredibly bright incredibly
beautiful and clear the hardest thing to
describe when I say light it's almost
like it becomes so refined and so
intense it becomes invisible
it's just clear clear your mind is just
so incredibly clear and I came to
understand what the Buddhists meant when
they say touching this for one second
undoes thousands of years of living in
the shadows of karma it is radically
pure clear and once I touched that I
wasn't interested in exploring any of
the other dimensions of spiritual
reality that I had encountered before
which include Collective Dimensions the
collective unconscious archetypal
reality even dimensions of causal
Oneness this was something totally
completely different and in the last
five years of my work in 26 sessions
which is one third of my entire journey
I only touched this reality four times
okay and and every time I touched it it
would trigger more purification more
detoxification and a Year's worth of
work before I was able to come back and
touch it again
wow and was that something having
touched it that kept you going you know
had you seeking it again and again
absolutely yeah
the last third of my work that was my
agenda was to go back so do whatever I
needed to do to go back into that
reality
so if I understand this right and you
know I haven't read a huge amount about
the Bardo but what you're saying is that
there are these different layers if you
like almost stages and um over probably
Millennia we gradually go through them
but you went through them you know in
that much time
um you know what kind of effect does
that have on someone
well I want to be careful here
um
I think what happens in a psychedelic
therapeutically focused psychedelic
session or spiritually focused
psychedelic session is that you speed up
what is happening in life
at a slower Pace in a natural process so
reincarnation as I understand it we are
growing we are evolving we die we return
to Soul Consciousness we're born we can
track down into egoic Consciousness we
die we go back into Soul Consciousness
and that we keep this up and keep this
up over long periods of time we we
choose lives which challenge us stretch
us heal us allow us to develop new
talents new capacities to deepen the
capacities that we've started
what happens I think in psychedelic
therapy is that that whole process is
accelerated this is I think this is true
for meditation in meditation when you do
long sustained Retreats of meditation
you are speeding up the process that's
taking place at a slower pace
in ordinary life
and so
I get you do bite off larger pieces of
personal Karma but then something else
takes over it's not about your personal
Enlightenment it's not about your
personal development
uh your ties to the Human family
your ties to the family of Life your
ties to the universe deepen and you
begin to feel a sense of dance or a
sense of Engagement of this deep
profound life process
and I think
I think you can take it too far then
it's comfortable you can take it so
deeply you can you can be dissolved so
completely into these vast flows of
Consciousness and vast dimensions of
existence
that it's very hard to come back out of
them and it's it's hard in the sense
that it's hard to leave the joy it's
hard to leave the clarity and the
Ecstasy and come back into time and
space
now that doesn't mean because you've
touched them and because you've known
them it doesn't mean that you can
stabilize that awareness back inside
time and space it doesn't mean that you
have accomplished what some of the great
spiritual teachers have accomplished who
can abide one foot in one foot out in
those realities I really really
emphasize this is a path of temporary
immersion
temporary you have not just because
you've had a temporary experience of
Oneness of life or Transcendence doesn't
mean that you are as fully developed a
spiritual being as somebody who can
abide in that reality and I all honor
truly to the great spiritual Masters who
have abiding the capacity to abide in
that reality
so
I wouldn't say necessarily that I
accomplished all of those evolutionary
Journeys in one lifetime but I I
certainly did do something pointing in
that direction
but you also you can't unknow what you
know and when you come back knowing what
you know it must be hell to you know
have to you know move into a world that
is so far away from that that is just
you know falling apart on every level I
mean how do you cope with that it's such
a dichotomy
it is challenging uh
there are mitigating processes though
too
because the deeper your experience of
the intelligence of life and the joy of
the creative intelligence in manifesting
existence then you begin to look around
you and you see the universe for what it
is the universe is the body of the
Divine the body of God the universe is
the manifestation
of the intelligence of a profound
intelligence and once you touch that
intelligence I mean we all know what
intelligence looks and feels like we we
recognize it when we meet it in people
and this is a cosmic intelligence that
just overwhelms you with its Brilliance
and its wisdom and overwhelms you with
love unlike beyond anything I had ever
known in this lifetime and I've known
love in this lifetime this is a
different order of love and once you
experience those things then it changes
how you see the universe it changes how
you see life and it also gives you a
larger Horizon within which to
understand The Human Experience I mean
it
I re I adopted reincarnation on the
basis of the empirical evidence early in
my career I read Ian Stevenson's work I
read the early work on a past life
therapist and I was convinced
intellectually that reincarnation was a
fact of life but it still takes years to
truly absorb and live into the fabric
of a universe that pulses in a
reincarnation cycle not just for the
individual but for the entire human
species so I had experiences in which I
understood my current Life as a
continuity of extending from previous
lifetimes but I also had at a deeper
level experiences of the entire human
species pulsing
Generation by generation pulsing in
essay reincarnating species and that all
of our individual challenges and our
individual Karma was a fractal
manifestation of this larger species
challenge in this species Karma that we
were working and when you have those
experiences
you look at other human beings
differently you look at the planet
differently you look at the Galaxy
differently there is a sense of deeper
participation in a mystery which you may
not understand the details of but you
can feel the joy because you know the
you've touched the intelligence that's
behind it
and that makes it eat that makes it more
joyful to enter into it now there is a
sadness that you can't sustain those
Peak experiences but in another month or
two or I was doing this about four or
five times a year
I would go back into this reality and
not every time necessarily but I would
go back often enough that I would be
able to drink deeply again
the full cost
of how deep I went did not really emerge
until I stopped my sessions
at the end of the journey
I the universe basically
told me it was time to stop and I could
feel that it was time to stop and I
stopped
but it was only then when I wasn't
returning in a few months to have
another deep communion with my beloved
that I began to realize the true cost of
overextending overextending myself as
deeply as I had into the transcendental
side of existence
um before we go to the break there's a
one question you said that the universe
is the body of God
what are we
are part of the universe so we are part
of the body of God too we are part of
the manifestation of the intention of
the universe to create our mind just as
our body is rooted in the quantum uh
reality of life and the atomic reality
of life and the whole evolutionary story
is built into the nerves and the
vascular systems and the organs of our
body so we become inseparable
from life as it is manifesting in the
galaxy in the planet on this continent
likewise our minds are part of the
creative intelligence that's manifesting
existence that's why when we go deep
into our minds we we drop down into the
cursed depth of our personal mind and we
find that there is no floor
at the bottom of our mind we fall right
through into the mind of the species
right through into the mind of the
universe and when when you go that deep
then
then the Hindu teaching Atman is Brahman
the essence of the individual is the
essence of the totality that just
becomes the most natural thing in the
world that becomes core truth and one of
the likewise a core truth is Oneness to
ex Brahman is one
and we are part we are an aspect of
fractal manifestation of that Oneness
once one has known that
even when you go back to paying your
bills and and doing the things we do in
the physical world all you have to do is
step back
and then you can reappreciate these
deeper truths which are the deeper
pulsing of life
hmm we're going to take a short break
now
um I'm Sandy sedgebear my guest today is
eminent philosopher and theologian
speaker and author Christopher M baish
whose latest book LSD in the mind of the
universe diamonds from Heaven which
rigorously Chronicles his intensive
systematic 73 session 20 years
psychedelic series of Journeys into a
unified field of Consciousness that
underlies all physical existence this is
completely mind-blowing so I need a
break just to reset my mind so that I
can ask intelligent questions we'll be
back in a few moments stay tuned
welcome back Chris space you've made it
quite clear that there is an
evolutionary Dimension to all of this
and as you move into the later chapters
in the book where you talk about the
birth of the diamond Soul you begin to
see that we are at an evolutionary cusp
and the Global Systems crisis that you
know we're all experiencing right now is
part of that
for what point what what is the ultimate
you know purpose here of all of this
happening
well let me break that down into two
parts
the classical Vision First on
reincarnation a few words the classical
vision of reincarnation as it's held in
most eastern Traditions is that you grow
you get clear
Kinder more generous you could cultivate
deeper and better qualities and
eventually you come to a spiritual
maturing where your Consciousness opens
to the core of your being and you awaken
to the fact that the essence of your
nature is in fact the essence of all
nature and that all beings and you are
sharing the same nature there's an
explosion of compassion a deep Embrace
of the universe and their interpretation
of what happens next is that you are now
free to leave time and space you uh in
the Hindus called it Moksha escape to
escape samsara
and this up and out cosmology all the
religions of the axial age in one way or
another are all part of a pattern of an
up and out cosmology we don't want to be
on earth we got here by accident it's a
veil of Tears we want to get out of here
either by salvation or Enlightenment we
want to get out of here
but that leaves fundamentally
unexplained what is the purpose of the
universe what is the purpose of This
Magnificent creation and now we have a
deeper understanding of the size of
existence the magnitude of the universe
how many billions of years went into the
evolving and unfolding of the universe
and it just becomes profoundly
unacceptable
short-sighted to think that the purpose
of life is to awaken to your true nature
and then Escape into Nirvana or Escape
into some off-planet Paradise
at a critical point in my work I had the
experience of all of my former lives
coming into me they were just coming in
one right after another and it was like
wrapping string white filament of light
white light around a kite spool
and at a certain point all those lives
fused into one Consciousness and at that
point there was an explosion of this
diamond light out of my chest and I was
catapulted into a
a deeper State of Consciousness than I
had ever touched before and I was an
individual
but an individual Beyond any frame of
reference that I had ever known
and this is what I came to call the
birth of the diamond soul
and that is I think that as we incarnate
over and over and over and over again
sooner or later the sole Consciousness
that we return to when we die wakes up
and manifests inside our time space
Consciousness we literally
the soul wakes up inside time and space
fully conscious
a hundred thousand year old being not a
hundred year old being fully
Consciousness with an intuitive
awareness of the breadth of Human
Relationships and an ability to enter
into deeper communion with the cosmic
intelligence and at that point we don't
leave
at that point we begin to live
differently on the planet and I think
the entire human species is evolving
into the in this direction to this point
into fully manifesting Soul
Consciousness and you know when I say
soul Consciousness I don't mean separate
isolated from each other fully
transparenta emptiness no self-concept
all affirmed but a soul manifesting
Consciousness and if you can imagine a
planet of a species filled with Souls
fully conscious Souls that species would
create a different life on this planet
than we've ever seen before
at another point in my work later in my
work I began actually over a period of
about four years
amidst everything else that was going on
in my sessions I began to have dumped
into my awareness a series of Visions
about human evolution and the message
was always the same we're coming to a
turning point a point of profound
Spiritual Awakening a before and after
in human history that it would involve
tremendous Collective purification but
this Collective purification was
emptying out the kind of the Pains of
History to allay a New Foundation for
this infusion a new infusion of divine
energy that was rising up within us
it was clear that and I was given a
taste glimpses of the future human this
a transformed Humanity that would emerge
out of this but it never showed me how
nature was going to pull this off it
never showed me how this would would
work
and then several years later in 1995
when I was already had already
transitioned to the diamond Luminosity
phase of my work so I was working in
pretty Advanced places
on a particular day at the end of 95
when I was expecting to be taken
hopefully back into the diamond
Luminosity instead it took me it
dissolved me into the species and so
Chris Bass Just dissolved into the Human
family
and then asked the Human family I was
taken into the future into what I call
Deep time
and there I began to experience
what I came to understand was a death
and rebirth process that was impacting
the entire Human family
just as an individual goes through an
intense death rebirth process when they
do spiritual practice or psychedelic
practice
history was putting the entire Human
family into a death rebirth process I
experienced an unraveling of Life a
profound loss of control we were losing
control of all the ordinary assumptions
of Life there was just a cascading
series of crises that were breaking us
down level by level I was not given any
details I I wasn't given any calendar of
events but this was a global crisis that
seemed to be triggered by us cascading
series of ecological crises
beyond that I wasn't given the details
but the whole
the whole system of life it was coming
Crashing Down
and then just when it was at its worst
just when it seemed like we would all be
dying
that this was an Extinction event
the peak of the storm passed
and things began to get easier and we
began to pick ourselves up and we began
to rebuild civilization and when we did
our entire existence was different we
were suffused with new ideas new thing
new ways of thinking new values new
capacities within the human heart which
generated new social relationships and
new social institutions somehow going
through this profound
Global Systems crisis broke us down
broke US Open
and tapped us into the universe at a
deeper level than we had ever been
tapped into before so that when we went
through this crisis we were changed
profoundly as a species and what came
out of this crisis was not just a new
civilization or a new economy or a new
industry
what came out of it was literally a new
kind of human being that this is a shift
in the plate tectonics of the collective
psyche a shift in the fundamental core
of the collective psyche now Humanity
has been through shifts in the past like
this there was a time when we shifted
and our brain size increased 50 percent
that's enormous shift in it this is
something like that it's a it's a deep
shift of the collective psyche so that
every human being born after this takes
place
will be living their individual
awareness will be alive within a field
of a collective awareness which is
different than the field that we are in
now and today
this is what I call the birth of the
future human and I think the form that
the future human will take will be the
diamond Soul we are giving birth to a
new species on this planet
a species which is spiritually awake a
species which is spiritually mature and
the species which is
a soul-conscious species a soul aware
species and by that I mean something
beyond anything that we've ever talked
about Soul before because I think our
restrictions our concept of Soul have
been restricted by assumptions we've
been making and that's why I call it the
diamond soul to signal that this is
something new this is something
different and I think our great
spiritual Masters our great Saints and
saviors Jesus the Christ the Buddhas the
prophets these have been giving us uh
foreshadowing insights into the nature
of the being that we are becoming they
are the prototypes of the being that we
are all becoming
and then laid in my and even late in my
journey I was taken deep into deep time
and was given my deepest experience of
the future human
and this being is
most magnificent being just
an extraordinarily magnificent beautiful
being of a vast heart
of a mind capable of drinking in deep
from the creative intelligence
and a heart capable of experiencing the
fundamental Oneness of all of life and a
being that experiences the fundamental
Oneness of Life we've never heard
another being not just another human
being never heard another being and such
a being would build a different world
than the world we're building now
so such a being
need to evolve
well I think this is simply the next
step in our evolutionary Saga I don't
know how long it's going to take for
this transition to be affected I truly
don't I mean I think it'll be at least
generations whether it'll be something
that will be accomplished in a hundred
years or several hundred years I don't
know but however long it takes let's say
it took a thousand years which I think
is stretching it because I think we'll
be dead if we don't make this transition
sooner than that we are either going to
go extinct I think or we're going to
transition into this new form
Extinction is a tremendous accelerator
of evolution near Extinction the threat
of Extinction
whatever however long it takes whatever
we become
Evolution isn't going to stop
we've been at this for billions of years
we're going we're going to be at this
for billions and billions of years more
there's no telling where we might be
going next and then next after that so I
don't see it as an endpoint or a
stopping point I see it as simply the
next point and the next point is to wake
up
to who what's been really going on to
who we really are
to wake up to the depth and breadth of
our relationships with life itself and
other people and other species and then
we continue
um
it's been 24 years since you stopped do
you feel that you have fully integrated
all of those experiences no no I haven't
when I when I finish my sessions and was
beginning the digesting process my
meditation in my meditation of the
universe said to me 20 years in 20 years
out
and I thought oh it'll take me 20 years
to assimilate 20 years of my journey
and as I was getting to the end when I
was writing diamonds from heaven
I thought that was probably an
optimistic assessment I think it'll take
me many lifetimes to fully integrate all
the the gifts that I've been given
what do you think in the light of what
you've told us what you've learned what
you've seen we most
urgently need to address now as a
species
boy there's so many layers to that
question
I think first we start by taking full
responsibility for our shadow
for engaging our shadow and clearing any
obstacles and blocks which are impeding
uh our compassion which are uh impeding
our healthy whole cycle spiritual
functioning
we need to reconnect and ReDiscover
our relationship with the universe and
our fundamental core identity with the
universe we need to overcome all these
several thousand years now of teaching
which places Humanity at the top of the
evolutionary pyramid and it's being
unique and kind
and not just unique in degree but unique
and kind and Superior to all other life
forms and all other life forms serve us
and can be used exploitatively by US all
that has to be transcended and we have
to enter into a renewed communion
with the universe with spiritual reality
and with physical reality I think we
need to to recognize that our body is
divine not just our mind and our heart
but our body is part of the
manifestation of divinity
SRI arbindo thought that Humanity
eventually would become so spiritually
energized that the body was sufficiently
psychoplastic that the body had the
capacity to live forever
he said his calculation would was that
it would take 300 years of spiritual
practice before we would reach the point
where we could set in motion the chain
reaction that would have our biological
body perpetually refreshing itself as we
live in communion with divinity now I I
don't know about that but I find it to
be an intriguing vision from a profound
teacher about the potential that we're
activating what's important is to
realize we are we're just children
waking up in the garden that's been
underway being developed for billions of
years we just are beginning to wake up
to what's going on to who we are to
what's happening
we really are like children in the in
the playpen
but where I think we're about to get out
of the playpen I think we're about to
walk I think we're about to become uh
mature adults
[Music]
um that there is an urgent need to get
psychedelics back on the table
um so that they're
um efficacy can be
proven and we can start adopting them as
a way of helping people to
um you know heal their wounds and
hopefully evolve even more quickly yeah
I think so I think there are very
valuable substance unfortunately we are
reclaiming them after our 40-year
interruption
because these are amplifiers of
Consciousness everything hinges on how
we use those hours of amplification
if we use those hours of amplification
carefully and wisely then these these
substances can help us heal the wounds
of life
we can go deeper than that these
substances can help us recover the
insides of our true nature of our
essential nature of our fundamental core
identity with all other life forms
they open up spiritual uh platforms
within a I think that psychedelics have
a profound philosophical significance
this is a different way of doing
philosophy where we systematically
temporarily expand our mind and then
come back and then write it down and
then analyze and crunch our experiences
and compare them to other people's
experiences one person's experiences are
are never important and by themselves
it's when we get many many people's
experiences and put them all on the
table together and begin to find out
where the common ground is what are the
common themes that emerge that's where
we begin to develop a truly trustable uh
epistemology a trustable set of insights
into what's going on so I think these
are enormously valuable they have to be
used very carefully they they should be
used with great respect when one
amplifies one's Consciousness the dirt
comes out of the system and if you're
not prepared to meet that dirt or you
open up under wrong circumstances it can
be terrifying you can do dangerous
things but if you've taken all the
precautions and you open up under the
right circumstances there is nothing
that comes out that can't be beneficial
if you face it with courage and with
grounding and with skill and I think we
are we are now training the next
generation of psychedelic therapists we
are training people to help other people
use these substances beneficially
but of course you know back in the 60s
there was a move a lot of people were
involved in doing experiments with these
to find out how they could be useful to
humanity and and they got shut down
um are you hopeful that this time we
will be able to move forward with this
and and find the benefits and allow
people
to benefit I hope so and that seems to
be where we're going the Psychedelic
Renaissance is really focused on
personal healing and uh by treating the
conditions that are generated by modern
culture post-traumatic stress disorder
depression uh addiction death anxiety
we're using scientific methodologies and
carefully frame studies in order to
document The Beneficial effect of these
substances
now once we do that once we establish
them and bring them back as legitimate
subjects for discussion in scientific
and just educated Society then I think
we'll be going into the next second and
third levels where we'll begin to
realize that these capacities these
substances not only heal have the
capacity to heal but they have the
capacity to reveal to open to a lumen
now civilizations have known indigenous
peoples have known this for Millennia
Ayahuasca is used in South America going
back at least 1500 years peyote
masculine mushrooms indigenous people
have been using these substances to open
up spiritual communion for Millennia
we're catching up and and so therefore
the indigenous people really are our
teachers
and how to use these substances wisely
do you ever wonder why you why did you
have this experience and not someone
else
foreign
have
used these substances wisely and have
had these and types of these experiences
so I'm just a representative of a whole
social movement and maybe I pushed the
edge harder than most and maybe I
because of my training maybe I wrote it
down and and analyzed it and kind of
worked out the details more than most
but I don't see myself as unique in any
way I see myself as part of a social
movement
uh when I got out of graduate school and
I met Stan Groff's work as soon as I met
his work I said I knew this was my work
this was my calling it was just it woke
up inside
why that was the case eventually it
really came back to decisions that were
made when I was in the Bardot before I
incarnated what my soul's work was going
to be and my soul's work really was very
much around education and very much
around healing but not
psychotherapeutic healing one-on-one but
really engaging healing at a very deep
Collective level and I think that there
are many many people working at this
level I think there are many hidden
Saints working to bring about the birth
of the future human I think there are
many bodhisattvas in the world some of
them are recognized and most of them are
not recognized but who really are they
invest their life in bringing about the
transformation of the lives of others of
helping others and helping us make it
through this crisis of that we are
entering into the Global Systems crisis
the ecological Christ assisted bearing
down on us it's going to take all of us
I think all of us chose to be here at
the time and the form that we incarnated
I think there are no victims
there are no there is no compulsion and
reincarnation
we all chose to enter this time in
history we we may not remember why but
we chose to be here we chose to be part
of this process
thank you thank you for joining us and
sharing your incredible journey and
thank you for sharing it with the world
thank you Sandy it's been my honor and
pleasure to be in discussion with you
today
likewise so LSD in the mind of the
universe diamonds from Heaven it's
published by Inner Traditions beer and
Company and for more information about
Chris basia's articles events and his
other three books The Living classroom
teaching in the collective Consciousness
Dark Knight early Dawn steps to a deep
ecology of mind and life cycles
reincarnation and the Web of Life visit
his website at
chrisbase.com that's it for this week
I'm Sandy sidere I'll be back with
another edition of what is going on at
the same time next week till then it's
goodbye from me and thank you again to
Chris space
thank you Sandy
[Music]
thank you